AUSTRALIAN PRODUCT INFORMATION – DIAMOX (ACETAZOLAMIDE)
TABLETS
1 NAME OF THE MEDICINE
Acetazolamide.
2 QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE COMPOSITION
DIAMOX tablets contain 250mg acetazolamide.
For the full list of excipients, see Section 6.1 List of excipients.
3 PHARMACEUTICAL FORM
DIAMOX tablets are white, round, convex tablet, one side plain, the other side scored into quarters.
4 CLINICAL PARTICULARS
4.1 THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS
For adjunctive treatment of: oedema due to congestive heart failure; drug-induced oedema;
centrencephalic epilepsies (petit mal, unlocalized seizures); chronic simple (open-angle) glaucoma,
secondary glaucoma and preoperatively in acute angle-closure glaucoma where delay of surgery is
desired in order to lower intraocular pressure.
4.2 DOSE AND METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION
Glaucoma
DIAMOX should be used as an adjunct to the usual therapy. The dosage employed in the treatment
of chronic simple (open-angle) glaucoma ranges from 250 mg to 1 g per 24 hours, usually in divided
doses for amounts over 250 mg. It has usually been found that a dosage in excess of 2 g per 24
hours does not produce an increased effect. In all cases, the dosage should be adjusted with careful
individual attention both to symptomatology and ocular tension. Continuous supervision by a
physician is advisable.
In treatment of secondary glaucoma and in the preoperative treatment of some cases of acute
congestive (closed-angle) glaucoma, the preferred dosage is 250 mg every 4 hours, although some
cases have responded to 250 mg twice daily on short-term therapy. In some acute cases, it may be
more satisfactory to administer an initial dose of 500 mg followed by 125 or 250 mg every 4 hours
depending on the individual case. Intravenous therapy may be used for rapid relief of ocular tension
in acute cases. A complementary effect has been noted when DIAMOX has been used in conjunction
with miotics or mydriatics as the case demanded.
1
Epilepsy
It is not clearly known whether the beneficial effects observed in epilepsy are due to direct inhibition
of carbonic anhydrase in the central nervous system or whether they are due to the slight degree of
acidosis produced by the divided dosage. The best results to date have been seen in petit mal in
children. Good results, however, have been seen in both adult and paediatric patients, in other
types of seizures such as grand mal, mixed seizure patterns, myoclonic jerk pattern etc.
The recommended dose in paediatric patients is 8-30 mg/kg daily in divided doses not to exceed 750
mg/day. In adults the recommended dose is 250-1000 mg daily in divided doses. When DIAMOX is
given in combination with any other anticonvulsant, it is suggested that the starting dose should be
250 mg once daily in addition to the existing medication. This can be increased to the levels
indicated above. The change from other medication to DIAMOX should be gradual in accordance
with usual practice in epilepsy therapy.
Congestive Heart Failure
For diuresis in congestive heart failure, the starting dose is usually 250 to 375 mg once daily in the
morning (5 mg/kg). If after an initial response, the patient fails to continue to lose oedema fluid, do
not increase the dose but allow for kidney recovery by omitting medication for a day. DIAMOX
yields best diuretic results when given on alternate days, or for 2 days alternating with a day of rest.
Failures in therapy may be due to overdosage or too frequent dosage. The use of DIAMOX does not
eliminate the need for other therapy such as digitalis, bed rest and salt restriction.
Drug-Induced Oedema
Recommended dosage is 250 to 375 mg (5 mg/kg) once daily for 1 to 2 days, alternating with a day
of rest.
Note: The dosage recommendations for glaucoma and epilepsy differ considerably from those for
congestive heart failure, since the first two conditions are not dependent upon carbonic anhydrase
inhibition in the kidney which requires intermittent dosage if it is to recover from the inhibitory
effect of the therapeutic agent.
Use in Patients with Renal Impairment
Acetazolamide is contraindicated in patients with a glomerular filtration rate (GFR) of <10mL/min
(see Section 4.3 contraindications). In patients with renal impairment, GFR of >10mL/min, the dose
should be reduced by half or the dosage interval should be increased to every 12 hours.
4.3 CONTRAINDICATIONS
Acetazolamide is contraindicated in the presence of:
•
hyperchloraemic acidosis
•
hypokalaemia
•
hyponatraemia
•
suprarenal gland failure
•
impairment of renal function, GFR < 10mL/min
2
•
•
•
hypersensitivity to acetazolamide, sulfonamides, or sulfonamide derivatives, or any
excipients in the formulation. Cross sensitivity between acetazolamide, sulfonamides and
other sulfonamide derivatives is possible.
marked liver disease or impairment of liver function, including cirrhosis because of the risk
of development of hepatic encephalopathy. Acetazolamide decreases ammonia clearance.
Severe glaucoma due to peripheral anterior synechias or in haemorrhagic glaucoma.
Long-term administration in patients with chronic noncongestive angle-closure glaucoma since it
may permit organic closure of the angle to occur while the worsening glaucoma is masked by
lowered intraocular pressure.
4.4 SPECIAL WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS FOR USE
General
Increasing the dose does not increase the diuresis and may increase the incidence of drowsiness
and/or paraesthesia. Increasing the dose often results in a decrease in diuresis. Under certain
circumstances however, very large doses have been given in conjunction with other diuretics in
order to secure diuresis in complete refractory failure.
There have been reports of increased muscular weakness, occasionally severe, in patients with
hyperkalaemic periodic paralysis who have taken acetazolamide.
When Acetazolamide tablets is prescribed for long-term therapy, special precautions are advisable.
The patient should be cautioned to report any unusual skin rash. Periodic blood cell counts and
electrolyte levels are recommended. Fatalities have occurred, although rarely, due to severe
reactions to sulphonamides. A precipitous drop in formed blood cell elements or the appearance of
toxic skin manifestations should call for immediate cessation of Acetazolamide tablets therapy.
For acute respiratory distress syndrome and pulmonary oedema, if rapidly progressive dyspnoea,
hypoxaemia, or chest X-ray abnormalities such as diffuse infiltrative shadow in both lungs are
observed, administration of this drug should be discontinued, and appropriate measures should be
taken. The frequency of these adverse reactions are not known.
Nervous
Suicidal ideation and behaviour have been reported in patients treated with anti-epileptic agents in
several indications. A meta-analysis of randomised placebo controlled trials of anti-epileptic drugs
has also shown a small increased risk of suicidal ideation and behaviour. The mechanism of this risk
is not known and the available data do not exclude the possibility of an increased risk.
Therefore patients should be monitored for signs of suicidal ideation and behaviours and
appropriate treatment should be considered. Patients (and caregivers of patients) should be advised
to seek medical advice should signs of suicidal ideation and behaviour emerge.
Hypersensitivity
Fatalities have occurred, due to severe reactions to sulfonamides and sulphonamide derivatives,
including acetazolamide. Adverse reactions common to all sulfonamide derivatives may occur:
3
fever, rash (including erythema multiforme, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, toxic epidermal necrolysis),
fulminant hepatic necrosis, agranulocytosis, aplastic anaemia and other blood dyscrasias,
anaphylaxis, renal and ureteral colic and renal lesions (see also Section 4.8 Adverse effects
(undesirable effects)).
Serious and occasionally fatal hypersensitivity (anaphylactic/anaphylactoid [including shock])
reactions have been reported in patients receiving acetazolamide.
The occurrence at the treatment initiation of a feverish generalized erythema associated with
pustula may be a symptom of acute generalised exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP) (see section 4.8
Adverse effects (undesirable effects)). In case of AGEP diagnosis, acetazolamide should be
discontinued and any subsequent administration of acetazolamide contraindicated.
Hypersensitivity reactions may recur if a sulfonamide or sulfonamide derivative is re-administered,
irrespective of the route of administration. The drug should be discontinued and appropriate
therapy instituted if such reactions are detected.
Choroidal effusion/detachment
Cases of choroidal effusion/detachment have been reported after the use of acetazolamide.
Symptoms include acute onset of decreased visual acuity, blurred vision or ocular pain and can occur
within hours to weeks after initiation of acetazolamide treatment. If choroidal effusion/detachment
is suspected, acetazolamide should be discontinued as rapidly as possible. Obtain appropriate
medical evaluation immediately and consider treatment of elevated intraocular pressure.
Haematological reactions
To monitor for haematological reactions common to all sulfonamides, it is recommended that a
baseline complete blood count (CBC), platelet count and electrolyte levels be obtained on patients
prior to initiating DIAMOX therapy and at regular intervals during therapy. If significant changes or
toxic skin manifestations occur, early discontinuation and institution of appropriate therapy are
important.
Glucose metabolism
Both increases and decreases in blood glucose levels have been described in patients treated with
acetazolamide. This should be taken into consideration in patients with impaired glucose tolerance
or diabetes mellitus.
Acid/base and electrolyte balance
Acetazolamide treatment may cause electrolyte imbalances, including hyponatraemia and
hypokalaemia, as well as metabolic acidosis. Therefore, periodic monitoring of serum electrolytes is
recommended. Particular caution is recommended in patients with conditions that are associated
with, or predisposed to, electrolyte and acid/base imbalance, such as patients with impaired renal
function, including elderly patients; (see Section 4.3 Contraindications, Section 4.4 Special warnings
and precautions for use – Use in the Elderly and Section 4.2 Dose and method of administration),
patients with diabetes mellitus, and patients with impaired alveolar ventilation (such as patients
with pulmonary obstruction or emphysema). DIAMOX tablets may aggravate acidosis and should be
used with caution.
4
Non-cardiogenic pulmonary oedema
Severe cases of non-cardiogenic pulmonary oedema have been reported after taking acetazolamide,
also after a single dose (see Section 4.8). Non-cardiogenic pulmonary oedema typically developed
within minutes to hours after acetazolamide intake. Symptoms included dyspnoea, hypoxia, and
respiratory insufficiency. If non-cardiogenic pulmonary oedema is suspected, acetazolamide should
be withdrawn, and supportive treatment should be given. Acetazolamide should not be
administered to patients who previously experienced non-cardiogenic pulmonary oedema following
acetazolamide intake.
Use in renal impairment
In patients with past history of renal calculi, benefit should be balanced against the risks of
precipitating further calculi
Use in the elderly
Metabolic acidosis, which can be severe, may occur in the elderly with reduced renal function (see
Section 4.3 Contraindications, Section 4.4 Special warnings and precautions for use - Acid/base
and Electrolyte balance and Section 4.2 Dose and method of administration).
Paediatric use
The safety and effectiveness of acetazolamide in paediatric patients have not been established.
Growth retardation has been reported in children receiving long-term therapy, believed secondary
to chronic acidosis. (See Section 4.2 Dose and method of administration)
Effects on laboratory tests
Sulfonamides may give false negative or decreased values for urinary phenolsulfonphthalein and
phenol red elimination values for urinary protein, serum non-protein nitrogen and for serum uric
acid. Acetazolamide may produce an increased level of crystals in the urine.
Acetazolamide interferes with the HPLC method of assay for theophylline. Interference with the
theophylline assay by acetazolamide depends on the solvent used in the extraction; acetazolamide
may not interfere with other assay methods for theophylline.
4.5 INTERACTIONS WITH OTHER MEDICINES AND OTHER FORMS OF INTERACTIONS
Amphetamines: By increasing the pH of renal tubular urine, acetazolamide reduces the urinary
excretion of amphetamine and so may enhance the magnitude and duration of the effect of
amphetamines.
Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitors: Because of possible additive effects with other carbonic anhydrase
inhibitors, concomitant use is not advisable.
Ciclosporin: When given concomitantly, acetazolamide may elevate cyclosporin blood levels.
Caution is advised when administering acetazolamide in patients receiving cyclosporin.
Folic Acid Antagonists: Acetazolamide may potentiate the effects of other folic acid antagonists.
5
Hypoglycaemics Agents: Both increases and decreases in blood glucose levels have been described in
patients treated with acetazolamide. This should be taken into consideration in patients with
impaired glucose tolerance or diabetes mellitus treated with antidiabetic agents.
Lithium: Acetazolamide increases lithium excretion due to impaired reabsorption of lithium in the
proximal tubule. The effect of lithium carbonate may be decreased.
Methenamine compounds: By increasing the pH of urine, acetazolamide may prevent the urinary
antiseptic effect of methenamine compounds.
Phenytoin: When given concomitantly, acetazolamide modifies the metabolism of phenytoin, leading
to increased serum levels of phenytoin. Acetazolamide may increase the occurrence, or accelerate
the manifestation of osteomalacia in some patients receiving chronic phenytoin therapy. Caution is
advised in patients receiving chronic concomitant therapy.
Primidone: By decreasing the gastrointestinal absorption of primidone, acetazolamide may decrease
serum concentrations of primidone and its metabolites, with a consequent possible decrease in
anticonvulsant effect. Caution is advised when beginning, discontinuing, or changing the dose of
acetazolamide in patients receiving primidone. There have been isolated reports of increased
carbamazepine serum levels with concurrent administration of acetazolamide.
Quinidine: By increasing the pH of renal tubular urine, acetazolamide reduces the urinary excretion
of quinidine and so may enhance the effect of quinidine.
Salicylates: Caution is advised for patients receiving concomitant aspirin and acetazolamide, as
severe toxicity has been reported. Severe metabolic acidosis has been reported in patients with
normal renal function during treatment with acetazolamide and salicylates. Pharmacokinetic studies
showed that the plasma protein binding and renal clearance of acetazolamide were significantly
reduced during chronic salicylate therapy. Salicylate appears to competitively inhibit plasma protein
binding of acetazolamide and simultaneously to inhibit acetazolamide renal secretion that may
produce serious metabolic acidosis. Systemic acidosis produced by acetazolamide may increase
salicylate toxicity by enhancing salicylate tissue penetration.
Precaution is advised for patients receiving concomitant high-dose aspirin and DIAMOX as anorexia,
tachypnoea, lethargy and coma have been reported due to a possible drug interaction. (See Section
4.4 Special warnings and precautions for use). Concomitant administration with high-dose aspirin
may potentiate the adverse reactions of DIAMOX.
Sodium Bicarbonate: The use of concurrent sodium bicarbonate therapy enhances the risk of renal
calculus formation in patients taking acetazolamide.
Cardiovascular Agents: Potentiation of the effects of oral anticoagulants is possible when
administered with Diamox, and may warrant a reduction in the dose of the anticoagulant.
Adjustment of dose may be required when DIAMOX is given with cardiac glycosides or
antihypertensive agents.
6
4.6 FERTILITY, PREGNANCY AND LACTATION
Effects on fertility
The potential adverse effects of acetazolamide on fertility and general reproductive performance
have not been adequately assessed in animals.
Use in pregnancy – Pregnancy Category B3
Acetazolamide, administered orally or parenterally, has been shown to be teratogenic (defects of
the limbs) and embryotoxic in mice, rats, hamsters and rabbits, at oral or parenteral doses in excess
of ten times those recommended in human beings. There are no adequate and well-controlled
studies in pregnant women.
As there are no adequate and well-controlled studies in pregnant women, DIAMOX should not be
used in pregnancy, especially during the first trimester.
Use in lactation.
DIAMOX has been detected in low levels in the milk of lactating women who have taken DIAMOΧ.
Therefore the potential exists for adverse reactions in the infant. Extreme caution should be utilized
when DIAMOΧ is administered to lactating women.
4.7 EFFECTS ON ABILITY TO DRIVE AND USE MACHINES
Some adverse reactions to acetazolamide, such as drowsiness, dizziness, ataxia, fatigue and myopia,
may impair the ability to drive and operate machinery.
4.8 ADVERSE EFFECTS (UNDESIRABLE EFFECTS)
Body as a whole
Headaches, malaise, fatigue, pain at injection site, fever, growth retardation in children, flaccid
paralysis, flushing and anaphylactic/anaphylactoid reactions, including shock and fatalities
Digestive
Gastrointestinal disturbances such as nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea
Haematological/Lymphatic
Blood dyscrasias such as aplastic anaemia, agranulocytosis, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia,
thrombocytopenic purpura, bone marrow depression and pancytopenia.
Metabolic/Nutritional
Metabolic acidosis and electrolyte imbalance, including hypokalaemia, hyponatraemia, osteomalacia
with long-term therapy, loss of appetite, taste alteration, hyper/hypoglycaemia. During long-term
therapy, metabolic acidosis and hypokalaemia may occur. This can usually be corrected by the
administration of bicarbonate and/or potassium.
7
Nervous
Drowsiness, paraesthesia, involving numbness and tingling of extremities and face, depression,
excitement, ataxia, reduced libido, confusion, convulsions, dizziness, irritability.
Skin
Allergic skin reactions, including urticaria, photosensitivity, Erythema multiforme, Stevens-Johnson
syndrome and toxic epidermal necrolysis. Thrombocytic purpura and acute generalised
exanthematous pustulosis (AGEP).
Special Senses
Hearing disturbances, tinnitus, myopia. Transient myopia is rare and invariably subsides upon
diminution or discontinuation of the medication. Choroidal effusion, choroidal detachment.
Urogenital
Crystalluria, increased risk of nephrolithiasis with long-term therapy, haematuria, Renal and ureteral
coli, renal lesions, calculus formation, abnormal liver function including fulminant hepatic necrosis,
hepatitis or cholestatic jaundice, glycosuria, renal failure.
The following adverse events have also been reported: polyuria, polydipsia, thirst, melaena, hepatic
insufficiency and photosensitivity.
Respiratory, thoracic and mediastinal disorders
Non-cardiogenic pulmonary oedema
Reporting suspected adverse effects
Reporting suspected adverse reactions after registration of the medicinal product is important. It
allows continued monitoring of the benefit-risk balance of the medicinal product. Healthcare
professionals are asked to report any suspected adverse reactions at www.tga.gov.au/reporting-
problems.
4.9 OVERDOSE
No specific antidote. Supportive measures with correction of electrolyte and fluid balance. Force
fluids. Serum electrolyte levels (particularly potassium) and blood pH levels should be monitored.
Acetazolamide is dialyzable.
For information on the management of overdose, contact the Poisons Information Centre on
13 11 26 (Australia).
5 PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES
5.1 PHARMACODYNAMIC PROPERTIES
Mechanism of action
DIAMOX (acetazolamide) is a carbonic anhydrase inhibitor.
8
DIAMOX is a nonbacteriostatic sulfonamide possessing a chemical structure and pharmacological
activity distinctly different from the bacteriostatic sulfonamides.
DIAMOX is an enzyme inhibitor that acts specifically on carbonic anhydrase, the enzyme that
catalyses the reversible reaction involving the hydration of carbon dioxide and the dehydration of
carbonic acid. In the eye this inhibitory action of acetazolamide decreases the secretion of aqueous
humour and results in a drop in intraocular pressure, a reaction considered desirable in cases of
glaucoma and even in certain nonglaucomatous conditions. Evidence seems to indicate that
DIAMOX has utility as an adjuvant in the treatment of certain dysfunctions of the central nervous
system (e.g. epilepsy). Inhibition of carbonic anhydrase in this area appears to retard abnormal,
paroxysmal, excessive discharge from central nervous system neurons. The diuretic effect of
DIAMOX is due to its action in the kidney on the reversible reaction involving hydration of carbon
dioxide and dehydration of carbonic acid. The result is renal loss of HCO3 ions, that carry out
sodium, water and potassium. Alkalinization of the urine and promotion of diuresis are thus
effected. Alteration in ammonia metabolism occurs due to increased reabsorption of ammonia by
the renal tubules as a result of urinary alkalinisation.
Clinical trials
No data available.
5.2 PHARMACOKINETIC PROPERTIES
Absorption
No data available.
Distribution
No data available.
Metabolism
No data available.
Excretion
No data available.
5.3 PRECLINICAL SAFETY DATA
Genotoxicity
The genotoxic potential of acetazolamide has not been adequately assessed, although in a bacterial
mutagenicity assay, it was found to be negative.
Carcinogenicity
Long term animal studies have not been conducted to investigate the carcinogenic potential of
acetazolamide.
9
6 PHARMACEUTICAL PARTICULARS
6.1 LIST OF EXCIPIENTS
DIAMOX tablets contain the following excipients: sodium starch glycollate, povidone, calcium
hydrogen phosphate dihydrate, maize starch and magnesium stearate.
6.2 INCOMPATIBILITIES
Incompatibilities were either not assessed or not identified as part of the registration of this
medicine.
6.3 SHELF LIFE
In Australia, information on the shelf life can be found on the public summary of the Australian
Register of Therapeutic Goods (ARTG). The expiry date can be found on the packaging.
6.4 SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR STORAGE
Store below 30°C.
6.5 NATURE AND CONTENTS OF CONTAINER
DIAMOX tablets are available in bottles (HDPE material) containing 100 tablets or 250* tablets.
* Not currently marketed in Australia
6.6 SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL
In Australia, any unused medicine or waste material should be disposed of by taking to your local
pharmacy.
6.7 PHYSICOCHEMICAL PROPERTIES
Acetazolamide is a white to yellowish-white crystalline substance, sparingly soluble in cold water
with a mp of 258-259°C, a weak acid and a pKa of 7.2, .
Chemical structure
Acetazolamide is N-(5-sulphamoyl-1,3,4-thiadiazole-2-yl acetamide and its structural formula is:
H3C
HN
S
S
NH2
N
N
C4H6N4O3S2
Molecular weight of 222.25
CAS number
CAS No. 59-6-5
10
7 MEDICINE SCHEDULE (POISONS STANDARD)
S4 (Prescription Only Medicine)
8 SPONSOR
Arrotex Pharmaceuticals Pty Ltd
15-17 Chapel Street
Cremorne VIC 3121
Australia
www.arrotex.com.au
9 DATE OF FIRST APPROVAL
9 September 1991
10 DATE OF REVISION
28 November 2025
SUMMARY TABLE OF CHANGES
Section Changed
4.4
4.7
Summary of new information
Update to Precautions section.
Update to effects on ability to drive and use machines (dizziness, ataxia)
11