AUSTRALIAN PRODUCT INFORMATION
ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS
abacavir (as sulfate)/lamivudine film-coated tablets
VIATRIS
Abacavir, a component of ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS tablets, is associated with hypersensitivity
reactions, which can be life-threatening, and in rare cases fatal. ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS
tablets, or any other medicinal product containing abacavir, MUST NEVER be restarted following a
hypersensitivity reaction (see Section 4.4 SPECIAL WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS FOR USE and
Section 4.8 ADVERSE EFFECTS (UNDESIRABLE EFFECTS)).
1 NAME OF THE MEDICINE
Abacavir sulfate and lamivudine
2 QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE COMPOSITION
ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS is supplied as film-coated tablets each containing 600 mg of abacavir
as abacavir sulfate and 300 mg lamivudine.
Excipients with known effect: sorbates and sulfites
For the full list of excipients, see Section 6.1 LIST OF EXCIPIENTS.
3 PHARMACEUTICAL FORM
ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS is a white, film-coated, modified capsule shaped, biconvex tablet
debossed with AL12 on one side of the tablet and M on the other side.
4 CLINICAL PARTICULARS
4.1 THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS
ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS tablets are a combination of two nucleoside analogues (abacavir and
lamivudine). ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS is indicated in antiretroviral combination therapy for the
treatment of Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) infection in adults and adolescents from 12 years of age.
4.2 DOSE AND METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION
Therapy should be initiated by a physician experienced in the management of HIV infection.
ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS tablets should not be administered to adults or adolescents who weigh
less than 40 kg because it is a fixed-dose tablet that cannot be dose reduced.
ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS tablets can be taken with or without food.
ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS tablets should not be prescribed for patients requiring dosage
adjustments, such as those with creatinine clearance <30mL/min. Separate preparations of abacavir or
lamivudine should be administered in cases where discontinuation or dose adjustment is indicated. In these
cases the physician should refer to the individual product information for these medicinal products.
Adults and adolescents
The recommended dose of ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS tablets in adults and adolescents is one
tablet once daily.
Elderly
The pharmacokinetics of abacavir and lamivudine have not been studied in patients over 65 years of age.
When treating elderly patients, consideration needs to be given to the greater frequency of decreased hepatic,
renal and cardiac function, concomitant medicinal products or disease.
ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS – PRODUCT INFORMATION
Children
2
ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS tablets are not recommended for treatment of children less than 12
years of age as the necessary dose adjustment cannot be made. Physicians should refer to the individual product
information for lamivudine and abacavir.
Renal impairment
Whilst no dosage adjustment of abacavir is necessary in patients with renal impairment, a dose reduction of
lamivudine is required due to decreased clearance. Therefore, abacavir/lamivudine fixed dose combination
tablets are not recommended for use in patients with a creatinine clearance <30 mL/min (see Section 5.2
PHARMACOKINETIC PROPERTIES - Special populations).
Administration in subjects with moderate renal impairment
Patients with a creatinine clearance between 30 and 49 mL/min receiving abacavir/lamivudine fixed dose
combination tablets may experience a 1.6 to 3.3- fold higher lamivudine exposure (AUC) than patients with a
creatinine clearance ≥50 mL/min (see Section 5.2 PHARMACOKINETIC PROPERTIES Special
populations). There are no safety data from randomised, controlled trials comparing abacavir/lamivudine fixed
dose combination tablets to the individual components in patients with a creatinine clearance between 30 and
49 mL/min who received dose-adjusted lamivudine. In the original lamivudine registrational trials in
combination with zidovudine, higher lamivudine exposures were associated with higher rates of haematologic
toxicities (neutropenia and anaemia), although discontinuations due to neutropenia or anaemia each occurred
in <1% of subjects. Other lamivudine-related adverse events (such as gastro-intestinal and hepatic disorders)
may occur.
Patients with a sustained creatinine clearance between 30 and 49 mL/min who receive abacavir/lamivudine
fixed dose combination tablets should be monitored for lamivudine-related adverse events, notably
haematologic toxicities. If new or worsening neutropenia or anaemia develop, a dose adjustment of
lamivudine, per lamivudine prescribing information, is indicated, which cannot be achieved with
abacavir/lamivudine fixed dose combination tablets. Abacavir/lamivudine fixed dose combination tablets
should be discontinued and the individual components should be used to construct the treatment regimen.
Risks and benefits of using abacavir/lamivudine fixed dose combination tablets in patients with renal
impairment should be assessed by a physician experienced in the management of HIV infection and discussed
with the patient.
Hepatic impairment
A dose reduction of abacavir may be required for patients with mild hepatic impairment (Child-Pugh grade
A). As dose reduction is not possible with_ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS tablets, the separate
preparations of abacavir and lamivudine should be used when this is judged to be necessary.
ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS is not recommended in patients with moderate and severe hepatic
impairment (Child-Pugh grade B or C) (see Section 5.2 PHARMACOKINETIC PROPERTIES - Special
populations).
4.3 CONTRAINDICATIONS
ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS tablets are contra-indicated in patients with known hypersensitivity
to abacavir or lamivudine, or to any of the excipients.
4.4 SPECIAL WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS FOR USE
Hypersensitivity - special warning
The special warnings and precautions relevant to both abacavir and lamivudine are included in this section.
There are no additional precautions and warnings relevant to abacavir/lamivudine fixed dose combination
tablets.
ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS – PRODUCT INFORMATION
Hypersensitivity to abacavir (see Section 4.8 ADVERSE EFFECTS (UNDESIRABLE EFFECTS))
3
Hypersensitivity to abacavir is a multi-organ clinical syndrome which can occur at any time during treatment,
but most often occurs within the first 6 weeks of therapy. Signs or symptom usually present in 2 or more of
the following groups although hypersensitivity following the presentation of a single sign or symptom has
been reported infrequently.
•
fever
•
rash
•
gastrointestinal, including nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, or abdominal pain
•
constitutional, including generalized malaise, fatigue, or achiness
•
respiratory, including dyspnoea, cough, or pharyngitis.
Hypersensitivity reactions may present similarly to pneumonia, bronchitis or pharyngitis, influenza-like illness
or gastroenteritis.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Discontinue abacavir/lamivudine combination tablet as soon as a hypersensitivity reaction is
suspected.
If hypersensitivity reaction cannot be ruled out, abacavir/lamivudine combination tablet or
any other medicinal product containing abacavir must not be restarted.
The risk is significantly increased for patients who test positive for the HLA-B*5701 allele.
However, abacavir hypersensitivity reactions have been reported at a lower frequency in patients
who do not carry this allele.
Abacavir/lamivudine fixed dose combination tablet is not recommended for use in patients
with the HLA-B*5701 allele or in patients who have had a suspected abacavir HSR while
taking any medicinal product containing abacavir.
Testing for HLA-B*5701 status is recommended before initiating abacavir treatment and also before
re-starting abacavir treatment in patients of unknown HLA-B*5701 status who have previously
tolerated abacavir.
The diagnosis of hypersensitivity reaction is based on clinical judgment. If a hypersensitivity
reaction is suspected, abacavir/lamivudine fixed dose combination tablet must be stopped
without delay, even in the absence of the HLA-B*5701 allele. Delay in stopping treatment with
abacavir after the onset of hypersensitivity may result in a life-threatening hypotension and death.
Rarely, patients who have stopped abacavir for reasons other than symptoms of hypersensitivity
reaction have also experienced life-threatening reactions within hours of re-initiating abacavir
therapy. Therefore, if a hypersensitivity reaction is ruled out, the reintroduction of
abacavir/lamivudine fixed dose combination or any other abacavir-containing product is
recommended only if medical care can be readily accessed.
Each patient be reminded to read the Consumer Medicine Information. They should be
reminded of the importance of removing the Alert Card included in the pack, and keeping it with
them at all times.
Patients who have experienced a hypersensitivity reaction should be instructed to dispose of their
remaining abacavir/lamivudine fixed dose combination tablets in order to avoid restarting abacavir.
Lactic acidosis/severe hepatomegaly with steatosis
Lactic acidosis and severe hepatomegaly with steatosis, including fatal cases, have been reported with the use
of antiretroviral nucleoside analogues alone or in combination, including abacavir and lamivudine in the
treatment of HIV infection. A majority of these cases have been in women. Clinical features which may be
indicative of the development of lactic acidosis include generalised weakness, anorexia and sudden
unexplained weight loss, gastrointestinal symptoms and respiratory symptoms (dyspnoea and tachypnoea).
Caution should be exercised when administering abacavir/lamivudine fixed dose combination tablets,
particularly to those with known risk factors for liver disease. Treatment with abacavir/lamivudine fixed dose
combination tablets should be suspended in any patient who develops clinical or laboratory findings suggestive
of lactic acidosis with or without hepatitis (which may include hepatomegaly and steatosis even in the absence
of marked transaminase elevations).
ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS – PRODUCT INFORMATION
Fat loss or fat gain
4
Fat loss or fat gain has been reported during combination antiretroviral therapy. The long term consequences
of these events are currently unknown. A causal relationship has not been established.
Serum lipids and blood glucose
Serum lipid and blood glucose levels may increase during antiretroviral therapy. Disease control and lifestyle
changes may also be contributing factors. Consideration should be given to the measurement of serum lipids
and blood glucose. Lipid disorders should be managed as clinically appropriate.
Immune reconstitution syndrome
In HIV-infected patients with severe immune deficiency at the time of initiation of anti-retroviral therapy
(ART), an inflammatory reaction to asymptomatic or residual opportunistic infections may arise and cause
serious clinical conditions, or aggravation of symptoms. Typically, such reactions have been observed within
the first few weeks or months of initiation of ART. Relevant examples are cytomegalovirus retinitis,
generalised and/or focal mycobacterial infections and Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia (often referred to as
PCP). Any inflammatory symptoms must be evaluated without delay and treatment initiated when necessary.
Autoimmune disorders (such as Graves' disease, polymyositis and Guillain-Barre syndrome) have also been
reported to occur in the setting of immune reconstitution, however, the time to onset is more variable, and can
occur many months after initiation of treatment and sometimes can be an atypical presentation.
Post-treatment exacerbations of hepatitis B
Clinical study and marketed use of lamivudine, have shown that some patients with chronic hepatitis B virus
(HBV) disease may experience clinical or laboratory evidence of recurrent hepatitis upon discontinuation of
lamivudine, which may have more severe consequences in patients with decompensated liver disease. If
abacavir/lamivudine fixed dose combination tablets are discontinued in patients co-infected with hepatitis B
virus, periodic monitoring of both liver function tests and markers of HBV replication should be considered.
Opportunistic infections
Patients receiving abacavir/lamivudine fixed dose combination tablets or any other antiretroviral therapy may
still develop opportunistic infections and other complications of HIV infection. Therefore, patients should
remain under close clinical observation by physicians experienced in the treatment of these associated HIV
diseases.
Transmission of infection
While effective viral suppression with antiretroviral therapy has been proven to substantially reduce the risk
of sexual transmission, a residual risk cannot be excluded. Precautions to prevent transmission should be taken
in accordance with national guidelines.
Mitochondrial dysfunction
Nucleoside and nucleotide analogues have been demonstrated in vitro and in vivo to cause a variable degree
of mitochondrial damage. There have been reports of mitochondrial dysfunction in HIV-negative infants
exposed in utero and/or post-natally to nucleoside analogues. The main adverse events reported are
haematological disorders (anaemia, neutropenia), metabolic disorders (hyperlactatemia, hyperlipasemia).
These events are often transitory. Some late-onset neurological disorders have been reported (hypertonia,
convulsion, abnormal behaviour). Whether the neurological disorders are transient or permanent is currently
unknown. Any child exposed in utero to nucleoside and nucleotide analogues, even HIV-negative children
should have clinical and laboratory follow-up and should be fully investigated for possible mitochondrial
dysfunction in case of relevant signs or symptoms. These findings do not affect current national
recommendations to use antiretroviral therapy in pregnant women to prevent vertical transmission of HIV.
Myocardial infarction
Several observational, epidemiological studies have reported an association with abacavir use and the risk of
myocardial infarction. Meta-analyses of randomised controlled trials have observed no excess risk of
ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS – PRODUCT INFORMATION
5
myocardial infarction with abacavir use. To date there is no established biological mechanism to explain a
potential increase in risk. In totality the available data from observational studies and from controlled clinical
trials show inconsistency and therefore the evidence for a causal relationship between abacavir treatment and
the risk of myocardial infarction is inconclusive.
As a precaution the underlying risk of coronary heart disease should be considered when prescribing
antiretroviral therapies, including abacavir, and action taken to minimize all modifiable risk factors (e.g.
hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, diabetes mellitus and smoking).
General
ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS should not be taken with any other abacavir or lamivudine containing
product.
As part of a triple-drug regimen, abacavir/lamivudine fixed dose combination tablet is generally recommended
for use with antiretroviral agents from different pharmacological classes and not solely with other
nucleoside/nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitors. This is based on results from randomised, double-blind,
controlled studies in which the proportion of subjects with early virological failure (for example tenofovir,
lamivudine and abacavir or tenofovir, lamivudine and didanosine) was higher in the triple nucleoside groups
than in groups who received regimens involving two nucleosides in combination with an agent from a different
pharmacological class. However, consideration needs to be given to a number of factors, including
compliance, safety, toxicity and preservation of future treatment options, which also remain important when
selecting an appropriate antiretroviral combination for a patient.
Therapy experienced patients
In clinical trials patients with prolonged prior NRTI exposure or who had HIV-1 isolates that contained
multiple mutations conferring resistance to NRTIs had limited response to abacavir. The potential for cross-
resistance between abacavir or lamivudine and other NRTIs should be considered when choosing new
therapeutic regimens in therapy-experienced patients with prolonged prior NRTI exposure, or who have HIV-
1 isolates containing multiple mutations conferring resistance to NRTIs (see Section 5.1
PHARMACODYNAMIC PROPERTIES – Cross-resistance).
Use in hepatic impairment
See Section 4.2 DOSE AND METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION and Section 5.2 PHARMACOKINETIC
PROPERTIES – Special populations.
Use in renal impairment
See Section 4.2 DOSE AND METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION and Section 5.2 PHARMACOKINETIC
PROPERTIES – Special populations.
Use in the elderly
See Section 4.2 DOSE AND METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION.
Paediatric use
ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS is a fixed combination product not suitable for use in children aged
<12 years who weigh less than 40 kg, for whom dosage recommendations vary based on body weight.
Effects on laboratory tests
See Section 4.8 ADVERSE EFFECTS (UNDESIRABLE EFFECTS) – Table 2.
4.5 INTERACTIONS WITH OTHER MEDICINES AND OTHER FORMS OF
INTERACTIONS
As ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS tablets contain abacavir and lamivudine, any interactions that have
been identified with these agents individually may occur with ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS tablets.
ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS – PRODUCT INFORMATION
6
Clinical studies have shown that there are no clinically significant interactions between abacavir and
lamivudine. Abacavir and lamivudine are not significantly metabolised by cytochrome P450 enzymes (such
as CYP 3A4, CYP 2C9 or CYP 2D6) nor do they inhibit or induce this enzyme system. Lamivudine does not
inhibit cytochrome P450 enzymes. Abacavir shows limited potential to inhibit metabolism mediated by
CYP3A4 and has been shown in vitro not to inhibit CYP2C9 or CYP2D6 enzymes. In vitro studies have shown
that abacavir has potential to inhibit cytochrome P450 1A1 (CYP1A1). Therefore, there is little potential for
interactions with antiretroviral protease inhibitors, non-nucleosides and other medicinal products metabolised
by major P450 enzymes.
The likelihood of metabolic interactions with lamivudine is low due to limited metabolism and plasma protein
binding, and almost complete renal clearance. Lamivudine is predominantly eliminated by active organic
cationic secretion. The possibility of interactions with other medicinal products administered concurrently
should be considered, particularly when the main route of elimination is renal.
Effect of abacavir on the pharmacokinetics of other agents
In vitro, abacavir demonstrates no or weak inhibition of the drug transporters organic anion transporter 1B1
(OATP1B1), OATP1B3, breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP) or P-glycoprotein (Pgp) and minimal
inhibition of organic cation transporter 1 (OCT1), OCT2 and multidrug and toxin extrusion protein 2-K
(MATE2-K). Abacavir is therefore not expected to affect the plasma concentrations of drugs that are substrates
of these drug transporters.
Abacavir is an inhibitor of MATE1 in vitro, however abacavir has low potential to affect the plasma
concentrations of MATE1 substrates at therapeutic drug exposures (up to 600 mg).
Effect of other agents on the pharmacokinetics of abacavir
In vitro, abacavir is not a substrate of OAΤΡ1Β1, ΟΑТР1B3, ОСТ1, OCT2, OAT1, MATE1, MATE2-K,
Multidrug resistance-associated protein 2 (MRP2) or MRP4, therefore drugs that modulate these transporters
are not expected to affect abacavir plasma concentrations.
Although abacavir is a substrate of BCRP and Pgp in vitro, clinical studies demonstrate no clinically
significant changes in abacavir pharmacokinetics when co-administered with lopinavir/ritonavir (Pgp and
BCRP inhibitors).
Interactions relevant to abacavir
Ethanol
The metabolism of abacavir is altered by concomitant ethanol resulting in an increase in AUC of abacavir of
about 41%. Given the safety profile of abacavir, these findings are not considered clinically significant.
Abacavir has no effect on the metabolism of ethanol.
Methadone
In a pharmacokinetic study, co-administration of 600 mg abacavir twice daily with methadone showed a 35%
reduction in abacavir Cmax and a one hour delay in tmax, but AUC was unchanged. The changes in abacavir
pharmacokinetics are not considered clinically relevant. In this study, abacavir increased the mean methadone
systemic clearance by 22%. This change is not considered clinically relevant for the majority of patients,
however occasionally methadone dose re-titration may be required.
Riociguat
In vitro, abacavir inhibits CYP1A1. Concomitant administration of a single dose of riociguat (0.5 mg) to HIV
patients receiving the combination of abacavir/dolutegravir/lamivudine (600/50/300 mg once daily) led to an
approximately three-fold higher riociguat AUC (0-∞) when compared to historical riociguat AUC (0-∞)
reported in healthy subjects. Riociguat dose may need to be reduced, consult the riociguat product labeling for
dosing recommendations and for interactions observed in patients receiving highly active antiretroviral
therapy.
ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS – PRODUCT INFORMATION
Retinoids
7
Retinoid compounds such as isotretinoin, are eliminated via alcohol dehydrogenase. Interaction with abacavir
is possible but has not been studied.
Effect of lamivudine on the pharmacokinetics of other agents
In vitro, lamivudine demonstrates no or weak inhibition of the drug transporters OATP1B1, OATP1B3, BCRP
or Pgp, MATE1, MATE2-K or OCT3. Lamivudine is therefore not expected to affect the plasma
concentrations of drugs that are substrates of these drug transporters.
Lamivudine is an inhibitor of OCT1 and OCT2 in vitro with IC50 values of 17 and 33 uM, respectively,
however lamivudine has low potential to affect the plasma concentrations of OCT1 and OCT2 substrates at
therapeutic drug exposures (up to 300 mg).
Effect of other agents on the pharmacokinetics of lamivudine
Lamivudine is a substrate of MATE1, MATE2-K and OCT2 in vitro. Trimethoprim (an inhibitor of these drug
transporters) has been shown to increase lamivudine plasma concentrations, however this interaction is not
considered clinically significant as no dose adjustment of lamivudine is needed.
Lamivudine is a substrate of the hepatic uptake transporter OCT1. As hepatic elimination plays a minor role
in the clearance of lamivudine, drug interactions due to inhibition of OCT1 are unlikely to be of clinical
significance.
Lamivudine is a substrate of Pgp and BCRP, however due to its high bioavailability it is unlikely that these
transporters play a significant role in the absorption of lamivudine. Therefore, co-administration of drugs that
are inhibitors of these efflux transporters is unlikely to affect the disposition and elimination of lamivudine.
Interactions relevant to lamivudine
Sorbitol
Coadministration of sorbitol solution (3.2 g, 10.2 g, 13.4 g) with a single 300 mg dose of lamivudine oral
solution resulted in dose-dependent decreases of 14% (9 - 20%), 32% (28 - 37%), and 36% (32 - 41%) in
lamivudine exposure (AUC∞) and 28% (20 - 34%), 52% (47 - 57%), and 55% (50 - 59%) in the Cmax of
lamivudine in adults. When possible, avoid chronic coadministration of sorbitol-containing medicines with
lamivudine. Consider more frequent monitoring of HIV-1 viral load when chronic coadministration cannot be
avoided.
Trimethoprim
Administration of trimethoprim/sulphamethoxazole 160 mg/800 mg (co-trimoxazole) causes a 40% increase
in lamivudine exposure because of the trimethoprim component. However, unless the patient has renal
impairment, no dosage adjustment of lamivudine is necessary (see Section 4.2 DOSE AND METHOD OF
ADMINISTRATION). Lamivudine has no effect on the pharmacokinetics of trimethoprim or
sulphamethoxazole. Administration of lamivudine in patients with renal impairment should be assessed
carefully. The effect of co-administration of lamivudine with higher doses of co-trimoxazole used for the
treatment of Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia and toxoplasmosis has not been studied.
Emtricitabine
Lamivudine may inhibit the intracellular phosphorylation of emtricitabine when the two medicinal products
are used concurrently. Additionally, the mechanism of viral resistance for both lamivudine and emtricitabine
is mediated via mutation of the same viral reverse transcriptase gene (M184V) and therefore the therapeutic
efficacy of these drugs in combination therapy may be limited. Lamivudine is not recommended for use in
combination with emtricitabine or emtricitabine-containing fixed-dose combinations.
4.6 FERTILITY, PREGNANCY AND LACTATION
ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS – PRODUCT INFORMATION
Effects on fertility
8
Abacavir had no adverse effects on the mating performance or fertility of male and female rats at oral doses
of up to 427 mg/kg per day, a dose expected to produce exposures approximately 30 fold higher than that in
humans at the therapeutic dose based on AUC. Orally administered lamivudine (up to 70 times anticipated
clinical exposure based on Cmax) have shown evidence of impairment of fertility in male and female rats.
There are no data on the effect of abacavir or lamivudine on human female fertility.
Use in pregnancy (Category B3)
There are no adequate and well-controlled studies in pregnant women and the safe use of abacavir, lamivudine
or abacavir/lamivudine fixed dose combination tablet in human pregnancy has not been established. Therefore,
administration of ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS in pregnancy should be considered only if the
benefit to the mother outweighs the possible risk to the foetus.
Abacavir has been evaluated in the Antiretroviral Pregnancy Registry. Available human data from the
Antiretroviral Pregnancy Registry do not show an increased risk of major birth defects for abacavir compared
to the background rate. The Antiretroviral Pregnancy Registry has received prospective reports of over 2,000
exposures to abacavir during pregnancy resulting in live birth. These consist of over 800 exposures during the
first trimester, over 1,100 exposures during the second/third trimester and included 27 and 32 birth defects
respectively. The prevalence (95% CI) of defects in the first trimester was 3.1% (2.0, 4.4%) and in the
second/third trimester, 2.7% (1.9, 3.9%). Among pregnant women in the reference population, the background
rate of birth defects is 2.7%. There was no association between abacavir and overall birth defects observed in
the Antiretroviral Pregnancy Registry.
Lamivudine has been evaluated in the Antiretroviral Pregnancy Registry. Available human data from the
Antiretroviral Pregnancy Registry do not show an increased risk of major birth defects for lamivudine
compared to the background rate. The Antiretroviral Pregnancy Registry has received reports of over 11,000
exposures to lamivudine during pregnancy resulting in live birth. These consist of over 4,200 exposures during
the first trimester, over 6,900 exposures during the second/third trimester and included 135 and 198 birth
defects respectively. The prevalence (95% CI) of defects in the first trimester was 3.2% (2.6, 3.7%) and in the
second/third trimester, 2.8% (2.4, 3.2%). Among pregnant women in the reference population, the background
rate of birth defects is 2.7%. The Antiretroviral Pregnancy Registry does not show an increased risk of major
birth defects for lamivudine compared to the background rate.
There is no data available on the treatment with a combination of abacavir, and lamivudine in animals. In
reproductive studies in animals, abacavir and lamivudine were shown to cross the placenta.
Studies in pregnant rats showed that abacavir is transferred to the foetus through the placenta. Developmental
toxicity (depressed foetal body weight and reduced crown-rump length) and increased incidences of foetal
anasarca and skeletal malformations were observed when rats were treated with abacavir at doses of 648 mg/kg
during organogenesis (approximately 35 times the human exposure at the recommended dose, based on AUC).
In a fertility study, evidence of toxicity to the developing embryo and foetuses (increased resorptions,
decreased foetal body weights) occurred only at 427 mg/kg per day. The offspring of female rats treated with
abacavir at 427 mg/kg (beginning at embryo implantation and ending at weaning) showed increased incidence
of stillbirth and lower body weights throughout life. In the rabbit, there was no evidence of drug-related
developmental toxicity and no increases in foetal malformations at doses up to 453 mg/kg (8.5 times the human
exposure at the recommended dose, based on AUC).
Lamivudine caused an increase in early embryonic deaths in the rabbit at exposures (based on Cmax and AUC)
less than the maximum anticipated clinical exposure. Lamivudine was not teratogenic in rats and rabbits with
exposure (based on Cmax) up to 40 and 36 times respectively those observed in humans at the clinical dosage.
There have been reports of mild, transient elevations in serum lactate levels, which may be due to
mitochondrial dysfunction, in neonates and infants exposed in utero or peri-partum to nucleoside reverse
transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs). The clinical relevance of transient elevations in serum lactate is unknown.
There have also been very rare reports of developmental delay, seizures and other neurological disease.
However, a causal relationship between these events and NRTI exposure in utero or peri-partum has not been
ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS – PRODUCT INFORMATION
9
established. These findings do not affect current recommendations to use antiretroviral therapy in pregnant
women to prevent vertical transmission of HIV.
Use in lactation
No studies have been carried out to determine the effects of the combination of abacavir and lamivudine in
lactating animals.
Abacavir and its metabolites are excreted into the milk of lactating rats. A study in lactating rats showed that
the concentration of lamivudine in milk was more than four times higher than that in maternal plasma.
Excretion of abacavir and lamivudine in breast milk has been reported in clinical studies, resulting in sub-
therapeutic infant plasma levels.
There is no data available on the safety of abacavir and/or lamivudine administered to babies less than three
months old.
Breast feeding is not advised because of the potential for HIV transmission from mother to child, and the
potential risk of adverse events due to antiretroviral drug excretion in breast milk.
In settings where formula feeding is unsafe or unavailable, the World Health Organisation has provided
Guidelines.
4.7 EFFECTS ON ABILITY TO DRIVE AND USE MACHINES
There have been no studies to investigate the effect of abacavir or lamivudine, on driving performance or the
ability to operate machinery. Further, a detrimental effect on such activities cannot be predicted from the
pharmacology of these medicinal products. The clinical status of the patient and the adverse event profile of
abacavir/lamivudine fixed dose combination tablets should be borne in mind when considering the patient's
ability to drive or operate machinery.
4.8 ADVERSE EFFECTS (UNDESIRABLE EFFECTS)
ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS tablets contain abacavir and lamivudine, therefore adverse events
would be expected to be similar to those experienced by patients on separate preparations of lamivudine and
abacavir. For many of the adverse events listed it is unclear whether they are related to specific antiretroviral
agents, or the wide range of other medications taken by HIV-infected patients, or whether they are a result of
the underlying disease process.
Description of selected adverse effects
Hypersensitivity to abacavir (see Section 4.4 SPECIAL WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS FOR USE)
Abacavir hypersensitivity reaction (HSR) has been identified as a common adverse reaction with abacavir
therapy. The signs and symptoms of this hypersensitivity reaction are listed below. These have been identified
either from clinical studies or post marketing surveillance. Those reported in at least 10% of patients with a
hypersensitivity reaction are in bold text.
Almost all patients developing hypersensitivity reactions will have fever and/or rash (usually maculopapular
or urticarial) as part of the syndrome, however, reactions have occurred without rash or fever. Other key
symptoms include gastrointestinal, respiratory or constitutional symptoms such as lethargy and malaise.
Skin:
rash (usually maculopapular or urticarial)
Gastrointestinal tract:
nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, abdominal pain, mouth ulceration
Respiratory tract:
dyspnoea, cough, sore throat, adult respiratory distress syndrome, respiratory
failure
Miscellaneous:
fever, fatigue, malaise, oedema, lymphadenopathy, hypotension, conjunctivitis,
anaphylaxis
ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS – PRODUCT INFORMATION
Neurological/Psychiatry: headache, paraesthesia
10
Haematological:
lymphopenia
Liver/pancreas:
elevated liver function tests, hepatic failure
Musculoskeletal:
Urology:
myalgia, rarely myolysis, arthralgia, elevated creatine phosphokinase
elevated creatinine, renal failure
Restarting abacavir following an abacavir HSR results in a prompt return of symptoms within hours. This
recurrence of the HSR is usually more severe than on initial presentation, and may include life-threatening
hypotension and death. Reactions have also occurred infrequently after restarting abacavir in patients who had
only one of the key symptoms of hypersensitivity (see above) prior to stopping abacavir; and on very rare
occasions have also been seen in patients who have restarted therapy with no preceding symptoms of a HSR
(i.e., patients previously considered to be abacavir tolerant).
For details of clinical management in the event of a suspected abacavir HSR see Section 4.4 SPECIAL
WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS FOR USE.
Clinical trial data
Table 1 lists the most common adverse events, occurring at an incidence of 5% or more, reported in the
controlled pivotal clinical trial CNA30021, irrespective of the investigator's assessment of possible
relationship to the study drug:
Many of the adverse events listed occur commonly (nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, fever, lethargy, rash) in
patients with abacavir hypersensitivity. Therefore, patients with any of these symptoms should be carefully
evaluated for the presence of this hypersensitivity reaction. If abacavir/lamivudine fixed dose combination
tablets have been discontinued in patients due to experiencing any one of these symptoms and a decision is
made to restart abacavir, this must be done only under direct medical supervision (see Special considerations
following an interruption of abacavir/lamivudine combination therapy in Section 4.4 SPECIAL WARNINGS
AND PRECAUTIONS FOR USE).
Table 1 Most Common (Greater than or equal to 5% Incidence) Grade 2 to 4 Adverse Events (Safety
Population - CNA30021)
Adverse Event
ABC once/day
ABC twice/day
N=384
N=386
n (%)
n (%)
Subjects with ANY Grade 2 to 4 AE
267 (70%)
276 (72%)
Drug hypersensitivity
35 (9%)
27 (7%)
Insomnia
26 (7%)
36 (9%)
Depression
25 (7%)
26 (7%)
Diarrhea
21 (5%)
25 (6%)
Nausea
21 (5%)
25 (6%)
Headache
21 (5%)
21 (5%)
Rash
21 (5%)
19 (5%)
Fatigue
20 (5%)
29 (8%)
Dizziness
19 (5%)
19 (5%)
Pyrexia
19 (5%)
13 (3%)
Abnormal dreams
15 (4%)
19 (5%)
Anxiety
12 (3%)
20 (5%)
Table 2 Grade 3 to 4 Treatment Emergent Laboratory Abnormalities (Safety Population - CNA30021)
Grade 3 and 4
ABC once/day
ABC twice/day
Laboratory
N=384
N=386
Abnormalities
N (%)
N (%)
ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS – PRODUCT INFORMATION
11
Clinical Chemistry
Gr 3
Gr 4
Gr 3-4
Gr 3
Gr 4
Gr 3-4
Elevated ALT
14 (4%)
9 (2%)
23 (6%)
18 (5%)
6 (2%)
24 (6%)
Elevated AST
10 (3%)
13 (3%)
23 (6%)
9 (2%)
5 (1%)
14 (4%)
Alkaline phosphatase
1 (<1%)
0
1 (<1%)
0
1 (<1%)
1 (<1%)
Amylase
13 (3%)
2 (<1%)
15 (4%)
12 (3%)
0
12 (3%)
Bilirubin
0
2 (<1%)
2 (<1%)
1 (<1%)
1 (<1%)
2 (<1%)
Creatine kinase
13 (3%)
31 (8%)
44 (12%)
13 (3%)
22 (6%)
35 (9%)
Creatinine
0
0
0
0
1 (<1%)
1 (<1%)
Glucose
4 (1%)
1 (<1%)
5 (1%)
5 (1%)
0
5 (1%)
Sodium
2 (<1%)
0
2 (<1%)
1 (<1%)
0
1 (<1%)
Triglycerides
13 (3%)
5 (1%)
18 (5%)
13 (3%)
8 (2%)
21 (6%)
Hematology
Hemoglobin
0
1 (<1%)
1 (<1%)
0
0
0
Neutrophils absolute
6 (2%)
3 (<1%)
9 (2%)
4 (1%)
1 (<1%)
5 (1%)
Platelets
2 (<1%)
0
2 (<1%)
2 (<1%)
0
2 (<1%)
WBC
0
0
0
1 (<1%)
0
1 (<1%)
Post-marketing data
In addition to the adverse events included from clinical trial data, the following adverse events listed in table
3 below have been identified during post-approval use of abacavir and lamivudine. These events have been
chosen for inclusion due to a potential causal connection to abacavir and/or lamivudine.
Table 3 Adverse Events Identified Post Approval
Body System
Abacavir
Lamivudine
Blood and lymphatic systems
Very rare: pure red cell aplasia
disorders
Metabolism and nutrition disorders
Common: lactic acidosis¹
Common: hyperlactataemia
Rare: lactic acidosis¹
Nervous system disorders
Very rare: paraesthesiae, peripheral
neuropathy has been reported
although a causal relationship to
treatment is uncertain
Gastrointestinal disorders
Rare: pancreatitis, but a causal
relationship to abacavir is uncertain
Rare: rises in serum amylase,
pancreatitis, although a causal
relationship to lamivudine is
uncertain
Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders Common: rash (without systemic
Common: alopecia
symptoms)
Very rare: erythema multiforme,
Stevens-Johnson syndrome and toxic
epidermal necrolysis
Musculoskeletal and connective tissue
Common: arthralgia, muscle
disorders
disorders
Rare: rhabdomyolysis
1See Section 4.4 SPECIAL WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS FOR USE
Reporting suspected adverse effects
Reporting suspected adverse reactions after registration of the medicinal product is important. It allows
continued monitoring of the benefit-risk balance of the medicinal product. Healthcare professionals are asked
to report any suspected adverse reactions at www.tga.gov.au/reporting-problems.
4.9 OVERDOSE
Symptoms and signs
No specific symptoms or signs have been identified following acute overdose with abacavir or lamivudine,
apart from those listed as Adverse Effects.
ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS – PRODUCT INFORMATION
Treatment
12
If overdose occurs the patient should be monitored for evidence of toxicity and standard supportive treatment
applied as necessary. Since lamivudine is dialysable, continuous haemodialysis could be used in the treatment
of overdose, although this has been studied. It is not known whether abacavir can be removed by peritoneal
dialysis or haemodialysis.
For information on the management of overdose, contact the Poisons Information Centre on 13 11 26
(Australia).
5 PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES
5.1 PHARMACODYNAMIC PROPERTIES
Mechanism of action
Abacavir and lamivudine are NRTIs, and are potent, selective inhibitors of HIV-1 and HIV-2. Both abacavir
and lamivudine are metabolised sequentially by intracellular kinases to the respective triphosphate (TP) which
are the active moieties. Lamivudine-TP and carbovir-TP (the active triphosphate form of abacavir) are
substrates for and competitive inhibitors of HIV reverse transcriptase (RT). However, their main antiviral
activity is through incorporation of the monophosphate form into the viral DNA chain, resulting in chain
termination. Abacavir and lamivudine triphosphates show significantly less affinity for host cell DNA
polymerases.
In a study of 20 HIV-infected patients receiving abacavir 300 mg twice daily, with only one 300 mg dose
taken prior to the 24 hour sampling period, the geometric mean terminal carbovir-TP intracellular half-life at
steady- state was 20.6 hours, compared to the geometric mean abacavir plasma half-life in this study of 2.6
hours. Similar intracellular kinetics are expected from abacavir 600 mg once daily. For patients receiving
lamivudine 300 mg once daily, the terminal intracellular half-life of lamivudine-TP was prolonged to 16 to 19
hours, compared to the plasma lamivudine half-life of 5 to 7 hours. These data support the use of lamivudine
300 mg and abacavir 600 mg once daily for the treatment of HIV-infected patients. Additionally, the efficacy
of this combination given once daily has been demonstrated in a pivotal clinical study (CNA30021- see
Section 5.1 PHARMACODYNAMIC PROPERTIES - Clinical trials).
The antiviral activity of abacavir in cell culture was not antagonized when combined with the nucleoside
reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) didanosine, emtricitabine, lamivudine, stavudine, tenofovir,
zalcitabine or zidovudine, the non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NNRTI) nevirapine, or the
protease inhibitor (PI) amprenavir. No antagonistic effects in vitro were seen with lamivudine and other
antiretrovirals (tested agents: abacavir, didanosine, nevirapine, zalcitabine, and zidovudine).
Resistance
HIV-1 resistance to lamivudine involves the development of a M184V amino acid change close to the active
site of the viral RT. This variant arises both in vitro and in HIV-1 infected patients treated with lamivudine-
containing antiretroviral therapy. M184V mutants display greatly reduced susceptibility to lamivudine and
show diminished viral replicative capacity in vitro. Studies in vitro indicate that zidovudine-resistant virus
isolates can become zidovudine sensitive when they simultaneously acquire resistance to lamivudine. The
clinical relevance of such findings remains, however, not well defined.
Genetic analysis of isolates from patients failing an abacavir-containing regimen demonstrated that reverse
transcriptase amino acid residue 184 was consistently the most frequent position for NRTI resistance-
associated mutations (M184V or M184I). The second most frequent mutation was L74V. Mutations Y115F
and K65R were uncommon. Viral resistance to abacavir develops relatively slowly in vitro and in vivo,
requiring multiple mutations to reach an eight-fold increase in IC50 over wild-type virus, which may be a
clinically relevant level.
In a study of therapy-naive adults receiving abacavir 600 mg once daily (n = 384) or 300 mg twice daily (n =
386) in a background regimen of lamivudine 300 mg and efavirenz 600 mg once daily (Study CNA30021),
there was a low overall incidence of virologic failure at 48 weeks in both the once and twice daily treatment
ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS – PRODUCT INFORMATION
13
groups (10% and 8% respectively). Additionally, for technical reasons genotyping was restricted to samples
with plasma HIV-1 RNA >500 copies/ml. This resulted in a small sample size. Therefore, no firm conclusions
could be drawn regarding differences in treatment emergent mutations between the two treatment groups.
Genotypic (n = 38) and phenotypic analyses (n = 35) of virologic failure isolates from this study showed that
the abacavir- and lamivudine-associated resistance mutation M184V/I was the most commonly observed
mutation in virologic failure isolates from patients receiving abacavir/lamivudine once daily (56%, 10/18) and
twice daily (40%, 8/20). L74V, Y115F and K65R were the other RT mutations observed in the study.
Thirty-nine percent (7/18) of the isolates from patients who experienced virologic failure in the abacavir once-
daily arm had a >2.5-fold decrease in abacavir susceptibility with a median-fold decrease of 1.3 (range 0.5 to
11) compared with 29% (5/17) of the failure isolates in the twice-daily arm with a median-fold decrease of
0.92 (range 0.7 to 13). Fifty-six percent (10/18) of the virologic failure isolates in the once-daily abacavir
group compared to 41% (7/17) of the failure isolates in the twice-daily abacavir group had a >2.5-fold decrease
in lamivudine susceptibility with median-fold changes of 81 (range 0.79 to >116) and 1.1 (range 0.68 to >116)
in the once-daily and twice-daily abacavir arms, respectively.
Cross-Resistance
Cross-resistance has been observed among nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors. Viruses containing
abacavir and lamivudine resistance-associated mutations, namely, M184V, L74V, Y115F and K65R, exhibit
cross-resistance to didanosine, emtricitabine, lamivudine, tenofovir, and zalcitabine in vitro and in patients.
The M184V mutation can confer resistance to abacavir, didanosine, emtricitabine, lamivudine, and
zalcitabine; the L74V mutation can confer resistance to abacavir, didanosine, and zalcitabine and the K65R
mutation can confer resistance to abacavir, didanosine, emtricitabine, lamivudine, stavudine, tenofovir, and
zalcitabine. The combination of abacavir/lamivudine has demonstrated decreased susceptibility to viruses with
the L74V plus the M184V/I mutation, viruses with K65R with or without the M184V/I mutation, and viruses
with thymidine analog mutations (TAMs: M41L, D67N, K70R, L210W, T215Y/F, K219 E/R/H/Q/N) plus
M184V. An increasing number of TAMs is associated with a progressive reduction in abacavir susceptibility.
Clinical trials
Abacavir and lamivudine have been used as components of antiretroviral combination therapy in naïve and
experienced patients. Combination therapy has included other antiretroviral agents of the same class or
different classes, such as PIs and NNRTIs. Abacavir and lamivudine from abacavir/lamivudine fixed dose
combination tablets have been shown to be bioequivalent to abacavir and lamivudine when given separately
(see Section 5.2 PHARMACOKINETIC PROPERTIES). The clinical efficacy of antiretroviral combination
therapy containing abacavir plus lamivudine, administered once or twice daily has been confirmed in the
studies described below.
A once daily regimen of abacavir and lamivudine was investigated in a multicentre, double-blind, controlled
study (CNA30021) of 770 HIV-infected, therapy-naïve adults. They were randomised to receive either
abacavir 600 mg once daily or 300 mg twice daily, both in combination with lamivudine 300 mg once daily
and efavirenz 600 mg once daily. Patients were stratified at baseline based on plasma HIV-1 RNA ≤100,000
copies/mL or >100,000 copies/mL. The duration of double-blind treatment was at least 48 weeks. The results
are summarised in Table 4:
Table 4 Virological Response Based on Plasma HIV-1 RNA <50 copies/mL at Week 48 ITT-Exposed
Population
Populations
ABC once/day
ABC twice/day
Point
95% CI*
+ 3TC + EFV
+ 3TC + EFV
Estimate
(N=384)
(N=386)
Stratified
-1.7
-8.4, 4.9
Sub-group by baseline RNA
≤ 100,000 copies/mL
141/217 (65%)
145/217 (67%)
-1.8
-10.8, 7.1
> 100,000 copies/mL
112/167 (67%)
116/169 (69%)
-1.6
-11.6, 8.4
Total population
253/384 (66%)
261/386 (68%)
* Confidence interval
ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS – PRODUCT INFORMATION
14
The abacavir once daily group was demonstrated to be non-inferior when compared to the twice daily group
in the overall and base-line viral load sub-groups. The incidence of adverse events reported were similar in
the two treatment groups.
In a multicentre, double-blind, controlled study (CNA30024), 654 HIV-infected, antiretroviral therapy-naïve
patients were randomised to receive either abacavir 300 mg twice daily or zidovudine 300 mg twice daily,
both in combination with lamivudine 150 mg twice daily and efavirenz 600 mg once daily. The duration of
double- blind treatment was at least 48 weeks.
In the intent-to-treat (ITT) population, 70% of patients in the abacavir group, compared to 69% of patients in
the zidovudine group, achieved a virologic response of plasma HIV-1 RNA ≤50 copies/mL by Week 48.
Patients were stratified at baseline based on plasma HIV-1 RNA ≤100,000 copies/mL or >100,000 copies/mL.
The abacavir group was demonstrated to be non-inferior when compared to the zidovudine group in the overall
and base-line viral load sub-groups. This study confirms the non-inferiority of a regimen containing abacavir
plus lamivudine, compared to a more widely used regimen of zidovudine plus lamivudine.
5.2 PHARMACOKINETIC PROPERTIES
Abacavir/lamivudine fixed dose combination tablets have been shown to be bioequivalent to abacavir and
lamivudine administered separately. This was demonstrated in a single dose, 3-way crossover bioequivalence
study (CAL10001) of abacavir/lamivudine fixed dose combination tablets (fasted) versus 2 x 300 mg abacavir
tablets plus 2 x 150 mg lamivudine tablets (fasted) versus abacavir/lamivudine fixed dose combination tablets
administered with a high fat meal, in healthy volunteers (n = 30).
In the fasted state there was no significant difference in the extent of absorption, as measured by the area under
the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC) and maximal peak concentration (Cmax), of each component. Food
did not alter the extent of systemic exposure to abacavir based on AUC, but Cmax was decreased by
approximately 24% compared to fasted conditions. These results indicate that abacavir/lamivudine fixed dose
combination tablets can be taken with or without food.
The pharmacokinetic properties of lamivudine and abacavir are described below.
Absorption
Abacavir and lamivudine are rapidly and well absorbed following oral administration. The absolute
bioavailability of oral abacavir and lamivudine in adults is 83% and 80-85% respectively. The mean time to
maximal serum concentrations (tmax) is about 1.5 hours and 1.0 hour for abacavir and lamivudine respectively.
Following a single oral dose of 600 mg of abacavir, the mean Cmax is 4.26 µg/mL and the mean AUC is 11.95
µg.h/mL. Following multiple-dose oral administration of lamivudine 300 mg once daily for seven days the
mean steady-state Cmax is 2.04 µg/mL and the mean AUC24 is 8.87 µg.h/mL.
Distribution
Intravenous studies with abacavir and lamivudine showed that the mean apparent volume of distribution is 0.8
and 1.3 L/kg respectively. Plasma protein binding studies in vitro indicate that abacavir binds only low to
moderately (~49%) to human plasma proteins at therapeutic concentrations. Lamivudine exhibits linear
pharmacokinetics over the therapeutic dose range and displays low plasma protein binding (<36%). This
indicates a low likelihood for interactions with other medicinal products through plasma protein binding
displacement.
Data show that abacavir and lamivudine penetrate the central nervous system (CNS) and reach the
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Studies with abacavir demonstrate a CSF to plasma AUC ratio of between 30 to
44%. The observed values of the peak concentrations are 9-fold greater than the IC50 of abacavir of 0.08 µg/mL
or 0.26 µM when abacavir is given at 600 mg twice daily. The mean ratio of CSF/serum lamivudine
concentrations 2-4 hours after oral administration was approximately 12%. The true extent of CNS penetration
of lamivudine and its relationship with any clinical efficacy is unknown.
ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS – PRODUCT INFORMATION
Metabolism
15
Abacavir is primarily metabolised by the liver with less than 2% of the administered dose being renally
excreted as unchanged compound. The primary pathways of metabolism in man are by alcohol dehydrogenase
and by glucuronidation to produce the 5'-carboxylic acid and 5'-glucuronide which account for about 66% of
the administered dose. These metabolites are excreted in the urine.
Metabolism of lamivudine is a minor route of elimination. Lamivudine is predominately cleared unchanged
by renal excretion. The likelihood of metabolic interactions with lamivudine is low due to the small extent of
hepatic metabolism (<10%).
Excretion
The mean plasma half-life of abacavir is about 1.5 hours. Following multiple oral doses of abacavir 300 mg
twice a day, there is no significant accumulation of abacavir. Elimination of abacavir is via hepatic metabolism
with subsequent excretion of metabolites primarily in the urine. The metabolites and unchanged abacavir
account for about 83% of the administered abacavir dose in the urine. The remainder is eliminated in the
faeces.
The observed lamivudine half-life of elimination is 18 to 19 hours. The mean systemic clearance of lamivudine
is approximately 0.32 L/h/kg, predominantly by renal clearance (> 70%) via the organic cationic transport
system.
Special populations
Impaired hepatic function
Pharmacokinetic data has been obtained for abacavir and lamivudine separately. Abacavir is metabolised
primarily by the liver. The pharmacokinetics of abacavir have been studied in patients with mild hepatic
impairment (Child-Pugh score 5-6). The results showed that there was a mean increase of 1.89 fold in the
abacavir AUC and 1.58 fold in the half-life of abacavir. The AUCs of the metabolites were not modified by
the liver disease. However, the rates of formation and elimination of these were decreased.
Dosage reduction of abacavir is likely to be required in patients with mild hepatic impairment. The separate
preparation of abacavir should therefore be used to treat these patients. The pharmacokinetics of abacavir have
not been studied in patients with moderate or severe hepatic impairment. Plasma concentrations of abacavir
are expected to be variable and substantially increased in these patients. Abacavir is therefore not
recommended in patients with moderate to severe impairment of hepatic function and abacavir/lamivudine
fixed dose combination tablets are therefore also not recommended in such patients.
Data obtained for lamivudine in patients with moderate to severe hepatic impairment show that the
pharmacokinetics are not significantly affected by hepatic dysfunction.
Impaired renal function
Pharmacokinetic data have been obtained for abacavir and lamivudine separately. Abacavir is primarily
metabolised by the liver, with approximately 2% of abacavir excreted unchanged in the urine. The
pharmacokinetics of abacavir in patients with end-stage renal disease is similar to patients with normal renal
function. Studies with lamivudine show that plasma concentrations (AUC) are increased in patients with renal
dysfunction due to decreased clearance. Lamivudine requires dose adjustment in patients with creatinine
clearance of <30 mL/min; as abacavir/lamivudine fixed dose combination tablets cannot be dose adjusted it is
not recommended in these patients and the separate preparation of lamivudine should be used. For patients
with creatinine clearance 30-49mL/min taking 300mg lamivudine daily, an approximately two-fold (range
1.6-3.3) increase in exposure of lamivudine was predicted in pharmacokinetic modelling studies. (see Section
4.2 Dose and method of administration).
5.3 PRECLINICAL SAFETY DATA
ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS – PRODUCT INFORMATION
Genotoxicity
16
Abacavir was inactive in in vitro tests for gene mutation in bacteria but it showed clastogenic activity against
human lymphocytes in vitro and in an in vivo mouse micronucleus test. Abacavir was mutagenic in the absence
of metabolic activation, although it was not mutagenic in the presence of metabolic activation in an L5178Y
mouse lymphoma assay. Abacavir was not mutagenic in bacterial mutagenicity assays.
Lamivudine was not active in a microbial mutagenicity screen but did induce mutations at the thymidine kinase
locus of mouse lymphoma L5178Y cells without metabolic activation. Lamivudine was clastogenic in human
peripheral blood lymphocytes in vitro, with or without metabolic activation. In rats, lamivudine did not cause
chromosomal damage in bone marrow cells in vivo or cause DNA damage in primary hepatocytes.
Carcinogenicity
There are no data available on the effects of the combination of abacavir and lamivudine in animals.
Carcinogenicity studies with orally administered abacavir in mice and rats showed an increase in the incidence
of malignant and non-malignant tumours. Malignant tumours occurred in the preputial gland of males and the
clitoral gland of females of both species, and in the liver, urinary bladder, lymph nodes and the subcutis of
female rats. Nonmalignant tumours occurred in the liver of mice and rats, Harderian gland of female mice,
and thyroid gland of rats. In rats, there were also increased incidences of urothelial hyperplasia and urinary
bladder tumours, associated with increased urinary calculi.
The majority of these tumours occurred at the highest abacavir dose of 330 mg/kg/day in mice and 600
mg/kg/day in rats. These dose levels were equivalent to 24 to 33 times the expected systemic exposure in
humans. The exception was the preputial gland tumour which occurred at a dose of 110 mg/kg. This is
equivalent to six times the expected human systemic exposure.
Mild myocardial degeneration in the heart of mice and rats was observed following administration of abacavir
for two years. The systemic exposures were equivalent to 7 to 24 times the expected systemic exposure in
humans. The clinical relevance of this finding has not been determined.
When lamivudine was administered orally to separate groups of rodents at doses up to 2000 times (mice and
male rats) and 3000 (female rats) mg/kg/day, there was no evidence of a carcinogenic effect due to lamivudine
in the mouse study. In the rat study there was an increased incidence of endometrial tumours at the highest
dose (approximately 70 times the estimated human exposure at the recommended therapeutic dose of one
tablet twice daily, based on AUC). However, the relationship of this increase to treatment is uncertain.
6 PHARMACEUTICAL PARTICULARS
6.1 LIST OF EXCIPIENTS
ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS tablets contain: microcrystalline cellulose, crospovidone, magnesium
stearate, silicified microcrystalline cellulose, colloidal anhydrous silica and purified talc.
The tablet coating OPADRY II complete film coating system 13B58894 White (ARTG PI No: 13119)
contains: hypromellose, titanium dioxide, macrogol 400 and polysorbate 80.
6.2 INCOMPATIBILITIES
Incompatibilities were either not assessed or not identified as part of the registration of this medicine.
6.3 SHELF LIFE
In Australia, information on the shelf life can be found on the public summary of the Australian Register of
Therapeutic Goods (ARTG). The expiry date can be found on the packaging.
6.4 SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR STORAGE
Store below 25°C.
ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS – PRODUCT INFORMATION
6.5 NATURE AND CONTENTS OF CONTAINER
17
Available in blister packs (PVC/PVDC/Al) or plastic HDPE bottles with a child-resistant closure. Each pack
type contains 30 tablets.
Some pack types may not be marketed.
Australian Register of Therapeutic Goods (ARTG)
AUST R 266516 – ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS abacavir (as sulfate)/lamivudine 600 mg/300 mg
film-coated tablet blister pack
6.6 SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL
In Australia, any unused medicine or waste material should be disposed of by taking it to your local pharmacy.
6.7 PHYSICOCHEMICAL PROPERTIES
Chemical Structure
Abacavir sulfate
Abacavir sulfate is the enantiomer with 1S, 4R absolute configuration on the cyclopentene ring.
Chemical name
: Bis[[(1S,4R)-4-[2-amino-6-(cyclopropylamino)-9H-purin-9-yl]cyclopent-2-
enyl]methanol] sulphate
Structural formula
:
HN
N H₂N
- H2SO4
N
CH2OH
2
Molecular formula
: (C14H18N6O)2 H2SO4
Molecular weight
: 670.76
Abacavir sulfate has a solubility of approximately 77 mg/mL in water at 25°C. Abacavir sulfate is a white to
off-white crystalline powder.
ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS – PRODUCT INFORMATION
Lamivudine
18
Lamivudine is the (-)enantiomer of a dideoxy analogue of cytidine. Lamivudine has also been referred to as
(-)2',3'-dideoxy, 3'-thiacytidine.
Chemical name
: 4-Amino-1-[(2R,5S)-2-(hydroxymethyl)-1,3-oxathiolan-5-yl]pyrimidin-2(1H)-
one
Structural formula
:
NH2
N
0
N
0
5
2
S
H
H
OH
Molecular formula
: C8H11N3O3S
Molecular weight
: 229.3
Lamivudine is highly soluble in water. Lamivudine is a white to off-white crystalline solid.
CAS Number
Abacavir sulfate: 188062-50-2
Lamivudine: 134678-17-4
7 MEDICINE SCHEDULE (POISONS STANDARD)
S4 (Prescription Only Medicine)
8 SPONSOR
Alphapharm Pty Ltd trading as Viatris
Level 1, 30 The Bond
30 - 34 Hickson Road
Millers Point NSW 2000
www.viatris.com.au
Phone: 1800 274 276
9 DATE OF FIRST APPROVAL
17/11/2017
10 DATE OF REVISION
09/01/2023
Summary Table of Changes
Section Changed Summary of New Information
ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS – PRODUCT INFORMATION
4.2, 5.2
Update of creatine clearance limit necessitating dosage adjustment
ABACAVIR/LAMIVUDINE VIATRIS_pi\Jan23/00
19