AUSTRALIAN PRODUCT INFORMATION
ACAMPROSATE VIATRIS
(acamprosate calcium) enteric coated tablets
VIATRIS
1 NAME OF THE MEDICINE
Acamprosate calcium
2 QUALITATIVE AND QUANTITATIVE COMPOSITION
Each ACAMPROSATE VIATRIS enteric coated tablet contains acamprosate calcium 333 mg as the active
ingredient.
For a full list of excipients, see Section 6.1 LIST OF EXCIPIENTS.
3 PHARMACEUTICAL FORM
ACAMPROSATE VIATRIS 333 mg enteric coated tablets: 10mm round, white, coated tablets, debossed
"333" on one side.
4 CLINICAL PARTICULARS
4.1 THERAPEUTIC INDICATIONS
ACAMPROSATE VIATRIS is indicated as therapy to maintain abstinence in alcohol dependent patients. It
should be combined with counselling.
4.2 DOSE AND METHOD OF ADMINISTRATION
Treatment with acamprosate calcium should be initiated as soon as possible after the withdrawal period and
should be maintained if the patient relapses. The recommended period of treatment is 1 year.
ACAMPROSATE VIATRIS tablets should be taken with meals, and swallowed whole.
Based on the clinical results the daily dose is fixed according to body weight:
For adults weighing 60 kg or more, the dose is 2 tablets taken three times daily (i.e. 2 tablets in the morning,
at midday and at night).
In adults weighing less than 60 kg, the dose is 2 tablets in the morning, 1 tablet at midday and 1 tablet at night.
Lower doses might be ineffective. The efficacy and safety of higher doses have not been established.
4.3 CONTRAINDICATIONS
ACAMPROSATE VIATRIS is contraindicated in:
•
•
•
•
patients with a known hypersensitivity to the medicine
pregnant or breastfeeding women
renal insufficiency (serum creatinine > 120 micromol/L)
severe hepatic failure (Child-Pugh Classification C)
4.4 SPECIAL WARNINGS AND PRECAUTIONS FOR USE
Acamprosate does not constitute treatment for the withdrawal period.
ACAMPROSATE VIATRIS – PRODUCT INFORMATION
2
Because the interrelationship between alcohol dependence, depression and suicidality is well recognised and
complex, it is recommended that alcohol-dependent patients, including those treated with acamprosate, be
monitored for respective symptoms.
Each tablet contains 33.3 mg of calcium. In preclinical studies, various signs of toxicity were observed,
including diarrhoea, hyperkeratosis and dysplasia of the stomach, soft tissue calcification, and increased deaths
due to renal and cardiac lesions in the rat.
Use in Hepatic Impairment
The safety and efficacy of ACAMPROSATE VIATRIS has not been established in patients with severe
hepatic failure (Child-Pugh Classification C).
Use in the Elderly
The safety and efficacy of ACAMPROSATE VIATRIS has not been established in patients older than 65
years. ACAMPROSATE VIATRIS should not be administered to the elderly.
Paediatric Use
The safety and efficacy of ACAMPROSATE VIATRIS has not been established in patients younger than 18
years. ACAMPROSATE VIATRIS should not be administered to children.
Effects on Laboratory Tests
No data available.
4.5 INTERACTIONS WITH OTHER MEDICINES AND OTHER FORMS OF
INTERACTIONS
The concomitant intake of alcohol and acamprosate calcium does not affect the pharmacokinetics of either
alcohol or acamprosate.
Administering acamprosate calcium with food diminishes the bioavailability of the medicine compared with
its administration in the fasting state.
Pharmacokinetic studies show no interaction between acamprosate calcium and diazepam, disulfiram or
imipramine.
Since pharmaco-interaction studies have not been performed with all psychotropic medicines, when
acamprosate is administered simultaneously with such medicines, it is advisable to monitor the patient
carefully for possible interactions.
Co-administration of naltrexone with acamprosate produced a 25% increase in AUC and a 33% increase in
Cmax of acamprosate; however, this finding has limited clinical impact so that no adjustment of dosage is
necessary in such patients. The pharmacokinetics of naltrexone and its major metabolite 6-beta-naltrexol were
unaffected following co-administration with acamprosate.
4.6 FERTILITY, PREGNANCY AND LACTATION
Effects on Fertility
No adverse effects on fertility or reproduction were observed in male or female mice administered acamprosate
at oral doses up to 2400 mg/kg daily (approximately 6 times human exposure at the maximum recommended
clinical dose, based on BSA), prior to and throughout mating and gestation. In an equivalent study in rats, no
effects were seen at daily oral doses up to 1000 mg/kg (approximately 5 times human exposure at the
maximum recommended clinical dose, based on BSA).
ACAMPROSATE VIATRIS – PRODUCT INFORMATION
Use in Pregnancy
Pregnancy category: B2
3
Acamprosate crosses the placenta and is distributed into fetal tissue following oral administration to pregnant
rats. Acamprosate administered during organogenesis was not teratogenic in mice, rats or rabbits at daily oral
doses up to 2400 mg/kg, 2000 mg/kg and 1000 mg/kg, respectively (approximately 6, 10 and 9 times human
exposure at the maximum recommended clinical dose, based on BSA). The safety of acamprosate calcium has
not been established in pregnant women. ACAMPROSATE VIATRIS should not be administered to pregnant
women (see Section 4.3 - CONTRAINDICATIONS).
Use in Lactation
Acamprosate calcium is excreted in the milk of lactating animals. Safe use of acamprosate calcium has not
been demonstrated in lactating women. ACAMPROSATE VIATRIS must not be administered to
breastfeeding women (see Section 4.3 - CONTRAINDICATIONS).
If a breastfeeding woman cannot abstain from drinking alcohol without being treated with acamprosate, a
decision must be made whether to discontinue nursing or to discontinue ACAMPROSATE VIATRIS, taking
into account the importance of the medicinal product to the woman.
4.7 EFFECTS ON ABILITY TO DRIVE AND USE MACHINES
Acamprosate should not impair the patient's ability to drive or operate machinery.
4.8 ADVERSE EFFECTS (UNDESIRABLE EFFECTS)
The following definitions apply to the frequency terminology used hereafter: very common (≥ 1/10), common
(≥ 1/100, < 1/10), uncommon (≥ 1/1,000, < 1/100), rare (≥ 1/10,000, < 1/1,000), very rare (< 1/10,000,
including isolated cases), frequency not known (cannot be estimated from the available data).
Within each frequency grouping, undesirable effects are presented in order of decreasing seriousness.
Gastrointestinal disorders:
Very common: Diarrhoea
Common: Abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, flatulence
Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders:
Common: Pruritus, maculo-papular rash
Not known: Vesiculo-bullous eruptions
Immune system disorders:
Very rare: Hypersensitivity reactions including urticaria, angio-oedema or anaphylactic reactions.
Reproductive system and breast disorders:
Common: Frigidity or impotence.
Psychiatric disorders:
Common: Decreased libido
Uncommon: Increased libido
ACAMPROSATE VIATRIS – PRODUCT INFORMATION
Reporting Suspected Adverse Effects
4
Reporting suspected adverse reactions after registration of the medicinal product is important. It allows
continued monitoring of the benefit-risk balance of the medicinal product. Healthcare professionals are asked
to report any suspected adverse reactions at: http://www.tga.gov.au/reporting-problems.
4.9 OVERDOSE
Acute overdosage with acamprosate is usually benign. In all reported cases, the only symptom which could
be reasonably ascribed to acamprosate overdose was diarrhoea. A risk of hypercalcaemia should be considered
in chronic overdosage only. Treatment of overdosage should be symptomatic and supportive.
For information on the management of overdose, contact the Poisons Information Centre on 13 11 26
(Australia).
5 PHARMACOLOGICAL PROPERTIES
5.1 PHARMACODYNAMIC PROPERTIES
Mechanism of Action
Acamprosate calcium has a chemical structure similar to that of amino acid neuromediators, such as taurine
or gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), including an acetylation to facilitate passage across the blood brain
barrier. Pharmacodynamic studies have been unable to confirm any specific neuromodulatory effect via amino
acid receptors. If acamprosate is administered to rats during the induction of ethanol-dependence, the elevation
of extracellular brain glutamate concentrations seen during ethanol withdrawal is decreased. In studies in rats
and dogs, there was inconclusive evidence of significant distribution of acamprosate into the brain following
oral administration of radiolabelled medicine.
Animal experimental studies have demonstrated that acamprosate calcium decreases the voluntary intake of
drinking water containing alcohol without affecting food and total fluid intake. The mechanism for this effect
in rats is unclear.
Clinical Trials
In an extensive clinical research programme, acamprosate proved its efficacy as an adjuvant to psycho-social
therapy over long treatment periods of up to one year, independent of the country where the trial was
performed and the type of psycho-social programme applied.
The primary outcome criteria was abstinence, defined as no alcohol intake whatsoever. In the combined
efficacy analysis which pooled data from 3338 weaned alcohol dependent patients, despite this very stringent
definition (more reliable from a standardisation point of view), the clinical data demonstrated that:
•
•
•
•
there is a doubling of the absolute abstinence rate after one year treatment when compared to placebo
with 22% of the acamprosate treated patients remaining completely abstinent for one year compared
to 12% in the placebo group.
patient compliance to remain in the treatment was statistically significantly different from Day 90
onwards with 50% retention rate in patients on acamprosate compared with 40% on placebo at the
end of the one year treatment period.
the drink-free periods (Cumulative Abstinent Duration calculated as a fraction of the total abstinent
days over the total duration of exposure to treatment) were much longer in the active treatment group
in 11 of 12 comparative studies: 53.3 ± 38.5% in acamprosate group compared to 40 ± 35.4% in the
placebo group.
there is no overt rebound drinking after termination of treatment and no signs of medicine withdrawal.
ACAMPROSATE VIATRIS – PRODUCT INFORMATION
5.2 PHARMACOKINETIC PROPERTIES
Absorption and Distribution
5
Acamprosate calcium absorption across the gastrointestinal tract is moderate, slow and sustained and varies
substantially from person to person. Food reduces the oral absorption of acamprosate calcium. Steady-state
levels of acamprosate calcium are achieved by the seventh day of dosing. Acamprosate calcium is not protein
bound.
Oral absorption shows considerable variability and is usually less than 10% of the ingested medicine in the
first 24 hours. After a single acamprosate dose of 2 x 333 mg tablets, peak plasma concentrations of
approximately 200 ng/mL are reached after 5 to 7 hours and longer. After a 15 minute infusion of 666 mg of
acamprosate, the volume of distribution is on average 72 ± 3 L.
Metabolism and Excretion
The medicine is excreted in the urine and is not metabolised significantly. There is a linear relationship
between creatinine clearance values and total apparent plasma clearance, renal clearance and plasma half-life
of acamprosate calcium. After oral dosing of 666 mg of acamprosate, the apparent elimination half-life ranged
from 13 to 28.4 hours. The pharmacokinetics of acamprosate calcium are not altered by hepatic dysfunction.
5.3 PRECLINICAL SAFETY DATA
Genotoxicity
Acamprosate showed no evidence of genotoxicity in a series of assays for gene mutations (bacterial and
mammalian cells) and chromosomal damage (human lymphocytes in vitro and micronucleus formation in
vivo).
Carcinogenicity
In carcinogenicity studies, mice and rats were administered acamprosate in the diet for 91 and 104 weeks,
respectively. In mice, there was no evidence of an increased incidence of tumours at doses up to 400
mg/kg/day, a dose which approximates the human exposure at the maximum recommended clinical dose,
based on body surface area (BSA). In male rats, there was an increased incidence of adrenal
phaeochromocytomas at 400 mg/kg/day (approximately twice human exposure at the maximum recommended
clinical dose, based on BSA). Dietary calcium can lead to adrenal medullary proliferative disease in rats but
there is no evidence that increased dietary calcium poses a risk of increased adrenal medullary lesions in
humans.
6 PHARMACEUTICAL PARTICULARS
6.1 LIST OF EXCIPIENTS
ACAMPROSATE VIATRIS enteric coated tablets contain the following inactive excipients: crospovidone,
microcrystalline cellulose, magnesium silicate dihydrate, sodium starch glycollate, colloidal anhydrous silica,
magnesium stearate, purified talc, propylene glycol and EUDRAGIT L30D-55 (ARTG PI No: 3700).
6.2 INCOMPATIBILITIES
Incompatibilities were either not assessed or not identified as part of the registration of this medicine.
6.3 SHELF LIFE
In Australia, information on the shelf life can be found on the public summary of the Australian Register of
Therapeutic Goods (ARTG). The expiry date can be found on the packaging.
6.4 SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR STORAGE
Store below 30°C.
ACAMPROSATE VIATRIS – PRODUCT INFORMATION
6.5 NATURE AND CONTENTS OF CONTAINER
Container type: PVC/PVDC/Aluminium blister packs.
Pack sizes: 18, 48, 54, 60, 84, 90, 168 and 180 enteric coated tablets.
Some strengths, pack sizes and/or pack types may not be marketed.
Australian Register of Therapeutic Goods (ARTG)
6
AUST R 298641– ACAMPROSATE VIATRIS acamprosate calcium 333 mg enteric coated tablet blister
pack.
6.6
SPECIAL PRECAUTIONS FOR DISPOSAL
In Australia, any unused medicine or waste material should be disposed of by taking it to your local pharmacy.
6.7 PHYSICOCHEMICAL PROPERTIES
Chemical Structure
Ca2+
H3C N
H
SO3
2
Molecular formula: C10H20N2O8S2Ca
Molecular weight: 400.48
CAS Number
77337-76-9 (acamprosate)
Acamprosate calcium is a white, odourless or practically odourless powder with a bitter taste. It is freely
soluble in water, practically insoluble in absolute ethanol and dichloromethane.
7 MEDICINE SCHEDULE (POISONS STANDARD)
S4 (Prescription Only Medicine)
8 SPONSOR
Alphapharm Pty Ltd trading as Viatris
Level 1, 30 The Bond
30-34 Hickson Road
Millers Point NSW 2000
www.viatris.com.au
Phone: 1800 274 276
9 DATE OF FIRST APPROVAL
06/03/2018
ACAMPROSATE VIATRIS – PRODUCT INFORMATION
10 DATE OF REVISION
18/07/2023
Summary Table of Changes
Section Changed Summary of New Information
All
4.6
4.8
Minor editorial changes
Inclusion of information on lactation
Addition of Vesiculo-bullous eruptions
ACAMPROSATE VIATRIS_pi\Jul23/00 (CCDS 10-Feb-2023)
7